Comparison of Common Crawl News & GDELT
Ameir El Ouadi and David Beskow
Department of Systems Engineering
United States Military Academy
West Point, NY, USA
Email: ameir.elouadi@westpoint.edu
Abstract—The corpus of worldwide news is important for
natural language processing, knowledge graphs, large language
models, and other technical efforts. Additionally, this corpus is
important for understanding the people, places, organizations,
and events that interact in real-time every day. This paper
compares two news datasets used for these tasks today, namely
the Global Database of Events, Language, and Tone (GDELT)
and Common Crawl News. Our research highlights the strengths
and limitations of each dataset, analyzing their content and
coverage. Notably, while GDELT relies on broadcasts, prints,
and web news from across the globe, Common Crawl focuses on
news sites from around the world gathered through web crawling.
Our analysis revealed considerable differences in where the two
datasets gather their news sources.
Index Terms—Open Source Data, News Data, NLP, LLMs
I. INTRODUCTION
The global stream of news data is a valuable source of
information about the people, places, and events that interact
daily worldwide. Two prominent open-source datasets that
claim to record and archive world news have emerged. The
first is the Global Database of Events, Language, and Tone
(GDELT), and the other is the Common Crawl repository.
This paper will compare the coverage and content of Common
Crawl and GDELT.
The GDELT project is an open repository of news data,
self-described as “A Global Database of Society.” The GDELT
database collects broadcasts, prints, and web news from across
the globe, spanning over 100 languages. GDELT’s data archive
dates to January 1979. GDELT’s ability to monitor the world’s
media provides context and information about international
politics, which is crucial for analyzing society through a global
lens. GDELT’s data provides a snapshot of global human
society and what is happening in the news internationally on
any given day.
To handle the massive influx of information and data
points coming from global events and news articles world-
wide, GDELT relies on high-performance computing clusters
and cloud storage solutions, specifically Google Cloud. The
GDELT data files utilize Conflict and Mediation Event Obser-
vations (CAMEO) coding to classify events in the news articles
automatically. The database identifies aspects of each news
data observation, including people, locations, organizations,
events, and images. The processed data is then stored in
a structured format, allowing researchers to analyze events,
themes, and emotions. GDELT’s ability to capture and store
large volumes of data facilitates comprehensive studies and
insights into global events and trends. It is important to note
that the GDELT database provides metadata about news events
and entities but not the raw text data itself. To get the raw text
data, a user must ‘re-hydrate’ the URLs.
The Common Crawl corpus is one of the most extensive
data corpora available today, gathering and storing a snapshot
of the accessible internet through web crawling. The Common
Crawl Foundation collects and maintains an open repository
of web crawl data containing raw web page data, metadata
extracts, and text extracts. Common Crawl publishes this data
as an open-source dataset for researchers, entrepreneurs, and
developers. Starting in 2016, the Common Crawl Foundation
made a News stream available, which we will call CC-News.
CCBot, a Nutch-based web crawler, has regularly crawled
the internet and collected data for the Common Crawl dataset
since 2007. The corpus contains over 250 billion pages of web
data, adding up to five billion pages every month. The web
crawl data is stored on Amazon Simple Storage Service (S3)
as WARC files. Common Crawl data has proven valuable for
research and training artificial intelligence, noting that 82%
of raw tokens used to train GPT-3 come from the Common
Crawl dataset. CC-News, a derived corpus of news data from
Common Crawl, was used in this research. The CC-News
dataset specifically contains articles from news sites all over
the world. This paper directly compares GDELT and CC-
News, two publicly available and widely used news datasets.
Analyzing each dataset, we seek to compare GDELT and CC-
News while highlighting their strengths and limitations.
II. LITERATURE REVIEW
With the immense growth of the web over the past few
decades, we have seen the increase in large-scale data and
data repositories. The importance of large-scale data and its
storage is especially relevant for research within computational
journalism. The most significant advancements in computa-
tional journalism came in the 1960s with the invention of event
data by Charles McClelland in his World Event/Interaction
Survey (WEIS) [1]. Edward Azar’s Conflict and Peace Data
Bank (COPDAB) followed WEIS. Both projects significantly
contributed to international politics research efforts using news
data [2].
In 1990, the National Institute of Standards and Technology
(NIST) created the TREC program with funding from the U.S.
Department of Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency
(DARPA). The TREC program helped create test collections
arXiv:2610.00587v1  [cs.IR]  30 Sep 2026


useful for research within computational journalism and or-
ganized conferences to disseminate the participants’ research
work. Early TREC campaigns heavily relied on news corpora
for experimentation, especially utilizing full-text newswire
articles [3]. The primary focus of these tasks was ad-hoc
retrieval, employing news corpora that usually consisted of
hundreds of thousands of documents sourced from prominent
news organizations [3].
Phillip A. Schrodt created the program and coding sys-
tem, KEDS, responsible for the automated content analysis
of news data and text to produce event data [4]. In 2010,
the U.S. Military sought to develop a crisis early warning
system and funded the ICEWS project through DARPA, which
utilized Schrodt’s KEDS as the coding basis [5]. ICEWS was
a significant advancement in computational journalism and
social science as it uses news data and text to be analyzed
by systematical models for predicting global events, laying
the groundwork for similar projects, such as GDELT. ICEWS
also serves as a data repository of event data, one of the largest
of its kind.
Comparable to ICEWS, the GDELT project is also a data
repository of event data, coded automatically from news
articles worldwide [6]. GDELT differs from ICEWS in that it is
open-source and available for anyone, as opposed to ICEWS,
which can only be accessed for official government use. Since
2013, the GDELT dataset has been widely used for research
within social science and was a groundbreaking achievement
due to its accessibility. GDELT has been utilized in research
in areas such as predicting social unrest [7], analyzing global
news coverage of disasters [8], as well as analyzing fake news
online [9]. Existing research also analyzes the GDELT dataset
and compares it to other news and event repositories such as
ICEWS [10] and EventRegistry [11].
The use of web corpora in computational journalism has
been crucial for research. However, access to many datasets is
restricted, which impedes many researchers. The accessibility
and extensity of the Common Crawl dataset have allowed
researchers to use it for many purposes, including natural
language processing [12], machine learning [13], and creating
derived data corpora [14]. Previous research presents a pre-
liminary analysis of the Common Crawl dataset regarding its
scale, composition, and feasibility for research [15]. In 2016,
the Common Crawl project released the CC-News dataset, a
crawl that specifically contains news data and publishes the
data regularly shortly after the WARC files are written. Due
to the nature of the web crawling process, Common Crawl
datasets have been found to contain undesirable content, as
presented in recent research [16].
III. METHODOLOGY AND RESULTS
We collected both CC-News and GDELT datasets for the
period from January 1, 2023, to June 31, 2023. We then con-
ducted temporal analysis, URL and domain name analysis, and
language analysis of the two datasets. One of the significant
questions we wanted to analyze was to what extent the two
datasets overlap. If organizations must choose one of them,
Figure 1: Shared URLs
Figure 2: Shared Domains
which contains the most content? How do the two datasets
differ in types of content?
The scale of both datasets proved to be quite similar. Over
the six months the data was collected, CC-News yielded
103,932,961 news articles, while GDELT yielded slightly
less with 96,411,230 news articles. Figure 1 shows a Venn
diagram showing the common news articles between the two
datasets. GDELT data presents a more extensive range of news
sources with 63,325 unique domains in the dataset. Despite
its scale, CC-News contains less than half the unique domains
of GDELT, with just 27,032. Comparing the domains of each
dataset, we see that they only share 4,626 domains in common,
as shown in Figure 2, a Venn diagram of the domains of both
datasets. This signifies that within GDELT and CC-News, only
5.4% of news sources are shared. This is a noteworthy statistic,
suggesting that the two datasets drastically differ in the news
sources their articles are collected from.
We found only one domain in common when comparing
each dataset’s top ten most frequent domains (see Table
I). Within the top one hundred most frequent domains of
each dataset, only six domains are shared between the two
datasets: zazoom.it, itanews.yahoo.com, g1.globo.com, time-
sofindia.indiatimes.com, alarmeringen.nl, and udn.com. The
disparity between the two datasets regarding shared news
sources is substantial. Further demonstrating this phenomenon,
only 17.11% of CC-News domains are indexed in GDELT,
and just 7.31% of GDELT domains are indexed in CC-News.
Despite being similar in size regarding the number of news
articles, the two datasets showed stark differences in news
sources.
The distribution of domains in each dataset differs slightly
between GDELT and CC-News. In GDELT, the top ten most
frequent domains account for 5.9% of the entire dataset,
with a large percentage of the dataset coming from domains
contributing a small number of documents. Nearly half of the
GDELT dataset, 46%, comes from domains contributing ten
or fewer news articles. The top ten most frequent domains
in CC-News account for 7.7% of the total corpus, similar to
the percentage found in GDELT when analyzing the same
statistic. Domains contributing ten or fewer articles in CC-
News account for 28% of the total corpus, a percentage
considerably less than that of GDELT.
In our analysis of the languages of the news articles in


GDELT and CC-News, we found that a substantial percentage
of articles from both datasets are written in English. The
second most frequent language in the two datasets is Spanish.
36% of articles in GDELT and 44% of articles in CC-News
are written in English. Both datasets share nearly the same
group of languages, with eight of the top ten languages in
common: English, Spanish, German, Russian, Italian, French,
Arabic, and Turkish.
We found a considerable amount of non-news content after
a deeper dive into the composition of domains within the
CC-News dataset. For example, the domain www.nike.com
contributes over 92,000 articles to the dataset. Most of these
web pages from Nike, the shoewear company, can be loosely
considered news as most are product announcements and press
releases for their shoes and clothing lines. Reddit, the social
news website and forum, contributed close to 20,000 articles to
CC-News. Aside from non-traditional news content, we found
that CC-News did contain some adult content-related domain
names, such as www.xvideos.com and rt.pornhub.com.
Table I: Top Domains from GDELT (left) and CC-News (right)
Top GDELT Domains
Lang
Articles
Top CC-News Domains
Lang
Articles
shuju.aweb.com.cn
zh
996,647
entreprises.lefigaro.fr
fr
1,144,893
zazoom.it
it
842,188
sportspyder.com
en
1,071,322
businessdayonline.com
ja
584,179
mirtesen.ru
ru
1,007,584
msn.com
en
562,012
zazoom.it
it
961,844
news.yahoo.com
en
503,882
www.newsbreak.com
en
860,118
inewsgr.com
el
496,323
immobilier.lefigaro.fr
fr
751,197
armenpress.am
hy
479,918
familio.org
en
610,376
chaspik.spb.ru
ru
439,844
www.aktiencheck.de
de
566,961
sohu.com
zh
437,292
www.etcmagazine.com.ar
es
539,394
haberler.com
tr
369,094
tvsomalilandeurope.net
en
443,993
IV. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
In an era where data plays a pivotal role in shaping deci-
sions, solving problems, and advancing systems, the storage
and accessibility of information are paramount. Web archiving
fosters innovation and academic research in our digital age.
However, many web archives are limited due to restricted
public access or technological and copyright constraints. The
GDELT project and Common Crawl have emerged as pioneers,
offering extensive, freely available big data that contributes
significantly to the academic community.
This paper presents a comparative analysis of two prominent
news datasets: GDELT and CC-News. Our research examines
various aspects of each dataset, including size, diversity,
news source quality, and language distribution. Through this
exploration, we provided beneficial insights to the computa-
tional journalism and social science communities. Researchers
should weigh the distinct characteristics of these datasets when
selecting datasets for their studies.
To conclude, GDELT, with its collection spanning tradi-
tional news sources worldwide, presents a comprehensive and
diverse range of information within its news data. On the
other hand, CC-News, derived from the Common Crawl, offers
a higher volume of news data and provides a perspective
on other web-based news content. We found the largest
differences between the two datasets in their news sources.
Furthermore, our comparative analysis highlights the strengths
and limitations of each dataset, allowing researchers to make
informed choices based on their specific study requirements,
not limited to utilizing both datasets simultaneously to leverage
the unique characteristics of each fully.
In future work, we will classify news articles by topic to
better analyze the composition of the content of each dataset.
It would also be helpful to understand how the emergence
of large language models increases the value of these types
of datasets and may limit their availability (for example,
increasing numbers of news websites block CC-Bot). As the
value of these types of datasets increases, understanding the
nuanced differences between them becomes important. Our
work takes a step toward exploring these differences.
Author Note:
The views expressed herein are those of
the authors and do not reflect the position of the United
States Military Academy, the Department of the Army, or the
Department of Defense.
REFERENCES
[1] C. A. McClelland, “World event/interaction survey codebook,” 1976.
[2] E. E. Azar, “The conflict and peace data bank (copdab) project,” Journal
of Conflict Resolution, vol. 24, no. 1, pp. 143–152, 1980.
[3] M. Sanderson et al., “Test collection based evaluation of information
retrieval systems,” Foundations and Trends® in Information Retrieval,
vol. 4, no. 4, pp. 247–375, 2010.
[4] P. A. Schrodt, S. G. Davis, and J. L. Weddle, “Political science: Keds—a
program for the machine coding of event data,” Social Science Computer
Review, vol. 12, no. 4, pp. 561–587, 1994.
[5] S. P. O’brien, “Crisis early warning and decision support: Contemporary
approaches and thoughts on future research,” International studies
review, vol. 12, no. 1, pp. 87–104, 2010.
[6] K. Leetaru and P. A. Schrodt, “Gdelt: Global data on events, location,
and tone, 1979–2012,” in ISA annual convention, vol. 2, pp. 1–49,
Citeseer, 2013.
[7] F. Qiao, P. Li, X. Zhang, Z. Ding, J. Cheng, H. Wang, et al., “Predicting
social unrest events with hidden markov models using gdelt,” Discrete
Dynamics in Nature and Society, vol. 2017, 2017.
[8] H. Kwak and J. An, “A first look at global news coverage of disasters
by using the gdelt dataset,” in Social Informatics: 6th International
Conference, SocInfo 2014, Barcelona, Spain, November 11-13, 2014.
Proceedings 6, pp. 300–308, Springer, 2014.
[9] C. J. Vargo, L. Guo, and M. A. Amazeen, “The agenda-setting power
of fake news: A big data analysis of the online media landscape from
2014 to 2016,” New media & society, vol. 20, no. 5, pp. 2028–2049,
2018.
[10] M. D. Ward, A. Beger, J. Cutler, M. Dickenson, C. Dorff, and B. Rad-
ford, “Comparing gdelt and icews event data,” Analysis, vol. 21, no. 1,
pp. 267–297, 2013.
[11] H. Kwak and J. An, “Two tales of the world: Comparison of widely
used world news datasets gdelt and eventregistry,” in Proceedings of
the International AAAI Conference on Web and Social Media, vol. 10,
pp. 619–622, 2016.
[12] C. Buck, K. Heafield, and B. Van Ooyen, “N-gram counts and language
models from the common crawl.,” in LREC, vol. 2, p. 4, 2014.
[13] J. R. Smith, H. Saint-Amand, M. Plamada, P. Koehn, C. Callison-Burch,
and A. Lopez, “Dirt cheap web-scale parallel text from the common
crawl,” Association for Computational Linguistics, 2013.
[14] J. Mackenzie, R. Benham, M. Petri, J. R. Trippas, J. S. Culpepper, and
A. Moffat, “Cc-news-en: A large english news corpus,” in Proceedings
of the 29th ACM International Conference on Information & Knowledge
Management, pp. 3077–3084, 2020.
[15] V. Kolias, I. Anagnostopoulos, and E. Kayafas, “Exploratory analysis of
a terabyte scale web corpus,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1409.5443, 2014.
[16] A. S. Luccioni and J. D. Viviano, “What’s in the box? a preliminary
analysis of undesirable content in the common crawl corpus,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2105.02732, 2021.
