Title: The geometry of conflict : 3D Spatio-temporal patterns in fatalities prediction

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.21067v1

Published Time: Fri, 24 Apr 2026 00:14:59 GMT

Number of Pages: 68

Markdown Content:
# The geometry of conflict : 3D Spatio-temporal patterns in fatalities prediction 

Thomas Schincariol 

> Trinity College Dublin, College Green, Dublin 2, Dublin, D02PN40, Ireland

Abstract 

Understanding how conflict events spread over time and space is crucial for predicting and mitigating future violence. However, progress in this area has been limited by the lack of methods capable of capturing the intricate, dynamic patterns of conflict diffusion. The complex nature of those trends needs flexibility in the models to untan-gle them. This study addresses this gap by analyzing spatio-temporal conflict fatality data using an innovative approach that transforms the data into three-dimensional pat-terns at the Prio-Grid level. In this paper, a shape-based model called ShapeFinder is adapted. By applying the Earth Mover’s Distance (EMD) algorithm, we detect and classify these patterns, allowing us to compare and match patterns with high adaptive capacity in all dimensions. Using historical similar patterns, we generate predictions of conflict fatalities and compare these with forecasts from the Views ensemble model, a leading benchmark. Our findings demonstrate that recognizing and analyzing conflict diffusion patterns significantly improves predictive accuracy, outperforming the bench-mark model. This research contributes to the study of conflict dynamics by introducing a novel pattern recognition framework that enhances the analysis of spatio-temporal data and offers practical applications for early warning systems. 

Keywords: Pattern, Conflict, Forecast, Spatio-temporal   

> Email address: schincat@tcd.ie (Thomas Schincariol)
> arXiv:2604.21067v1 [stat.AP] 22 Apr 2026

1. Introduction 

The spatio-temporal patterns of conflict have been a central focus for scholars over the past few decades. Understanding the conflict dynamics mechanisms could enhance the performance of fatalities forecasting to improve early warning systems further. Re-search has shown that one of the most reliable predictors of future fatalities is the lagged values of fatalities in the unit of analysis and its neighboring areas. However, clearly identifying the conflict underlying structures remains a challenge. Furthermore, most studies have primarily focused on civil conflict (Forsberg, 2014) or specific cases (Saideman, 2012; Kibris, 2021). Conflict mechanisms are often studied through the lens of diffusion, where fatali-ties are seen to spread across regions, like an epidemic. Diffusion is mostly studied as a general phenomenon occurring similarly across space and time. However, studying the specific patterns observed in conflict data might bring different information that expands our understanding of conflict dynamics and consequently improves the con-flict forecast accuracy. Forecasting models rely on past data to predict future events. Focusing only on historically similar cases can help distinguish valuable information that strengthens forecasting accuracy from unrelated dynamics that introduce noise. For example, Schutte and Weidmann (2011) identifies distinct patterns in the spread of conflict across four civil war cases. Similarly, Kelling and Lin (2020), using the case of South Sudan, shows how analyzing internal diffusion patterns can deepen our understanding of war dynamics. The generalizability of this approach is the next potential goal of researchers. Most traditional approaches rely on regression models (Racek, Thurner and Kauermann, 2025), often related to the Hawkes process (Hawkes, 1971), where fatalities in a given location increase the likelihood of subsequent conflict events in the neighbouring area. These models produce valuable insights but lack the flexibility needed to disentangle 2and compare the spatio-temporal patterns of conflicts. The mechanisms underlying conflict are intrinsically complex, requiring models capable of capturing events that, depending on their environment, unfold at varying speeds or scales. Current methods often perform a sophisticated averaging of neighbors, failing to identify specific spatio-temporal patterns. While some machine learning methods offer the potential for the flexibility needed to capture these complex dynamics, their application is restricted by significant drawbacks. These include their dependency on vast amounts of data and limited transparency, which restricts their capacity to generate clear explanations of findings, and often tend to underperform on tabular data (Shwartz-Ziv and Armon, 2022; Fayaz et al., 2022). This paper introduces a novel methodology designed to capture complex spatio-temporal conflict patterns, called ‘ShapeFinder’. Originally developed for country-level conflict forecasting (Schincariol, Frank and Chadefaux, 2025), the framework is adapted here to accommodate three-dimensional spatio-temporal patterns. The use of the dis-tance method called Earth Mover’s Distance (EMD) gives the model a certain flexibil-ity, enabling the comparison and matching of patterns across different geographic scales and intensities. This approach advances our understanding of conflict mechanisms by identifying significant patterns and contributing to making prediction models more ac-curate. A notable benefit of this autoregressive model is its simplicity and speed. It does not require any additional variables, which makes it easier to set up and use. The primary strength of the model is its transparency. By leveraging similar patterns from historical data to construct potential scenarios, it becomes possible to trace the cases driving predictions. The outcome information is twofold. First, the potential future scenarios with their occurrence in the historical data provide information about what happened in history when this pattern occurred. Second, these historical matches al-low a deeper analysis of the context in which this pattern emerges. This approach 3enables the association of specific dynamics with particular regions or time periods. This model contributes by offering an accessible spatio-temporal model that captures recurring patterns and uses them to forecast. This model holds a significant interest and has a distinct place in the forecasting literature, particularly when transparency is needed and when the data is highly zero-inflated and skewed, like the conflict fatalities data. Transparency in forecasts is essential for convincing non-expert audiences of a model’s credibility and for encouraging decision-makers and NGOs to adopt it as an early warning tool. ACLED’s Conflict Alert System (CAST) (ACLED, 2025), for exam-ple, includes a “What’s driving the forecasts?” feature that identifies the key variables influencing each prediction. Similarly, the ConflictForecast team (Mueller, Rauh and Seimon, 2024) presents the topics that increase or decrease predicted conflict risk of their text-based conflict forecasting model. In this context, the simplicity and transparency of the ShapeFinder are important advantages. Additionally, the model’s forecasting performance is evaluated against the Views ensemble model (Hegre et al., 2022), one of the leading benchmarks, using both fine-grained accuracy at the Prio-Grid level and broader assessments in larger zones of aggregated cells with both overall accuracy and dynamic fidelity. The ShapeFinder delivers convincing results on both the local and aggregate levels while maintaining transparency, making it a credible forecasting tool. The evaluation of conflict models at fine-grained geographic scales is complex and remains a subject of debate within the conflict forecasting community. Prio-Grid is widely used below the country level but introduces several challenges, mostly linked with the uncertainty in reported conflict events (Weidmann, 2015). At the same time, the prediction in point estimate is increasingly being replaced by probability distributions, which provide users with essential information about forecast uncertainty, essential for a better understanding of the risk associated. This shift introduces additional evaluation 4metrics, such as the Continuous Ranked Probability Score (CRPS), the probabilistic analog of mean absolute error, and uncertainty measures like the Mean Interval Score (MIS), which rewards narrower prediction intervals. More broadly, questions regarding the appropriate unit of analysis and the most suitable evaluation metrics would require a dedicated study. Here, the scope of the paper is intentionally centered around the model presentation and evaluation with classical metrics. However, flexibility remains regarding both the unit of analysis and the prediction format, and potential adaptations are discussed in the Discussion section. Such a model could be valuable for social science research, and particularly for conflict studies, by enabling deeper analysis of conflict patterns. Researchers could investigate the recurrence of specific patterns and their subsequent trajectories to de-termine whether certain configurations are associated with escalating intensity or the spatial spread of instability. The model could also be used to assess the impact of a given treatment by comparing outcomes across similar patterns that either received the treatment or did not, allowing researchers to study effects both over time and across space. The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. The next section reviews the relevant literature, followed by a description of the data selection and pre-processing steps. The model methodology is then detailed, together with the benchmark evaluation setup. The results are presented at both the Prio-Grid level and the active-zone level. The paper concludes with a discussion of the model’s limitations and potential future adaptations. 

2. Conflict Forecasting at the subnational level 

Classical spatio-temporal models were originally developed in fields such as epi-demiology, ecology, and traffic or urban planning. Deep learning approaches, including 5Graph Neural Networks (Corso et al., 2024) and Convolutional Networks (Yu, Yin and Zhu, 2017), have gained popularity in recent years for their strong predictive performance, but they still lack interpretability and simplicity, combined with high training data needs. Models such as self-exciting point processes (Reinhart, 2018), derived from Hawkes processes, offer better interpretability and have been applied to rare-event domains like crime risk (Reinhart and Greenhouse, 2018) and seismology (Davis, Baeumer and Wang, 2024). Similarly, the Spatiotemporal Autoregressive Dis-tributed Lag (STADL) model (Cook, Hays and Franzese Jr, 2023) provides clear and interpretable insights on spatiotemporal dependencies. However, the nature of conflict data, characterized by context-driven, time-varying dynamics and abrupt shifts, limits the effectiveness of these approaches. Yet, research over the past decades suggests that conflict often spreads across space and time (Black, 2013; Kathman, 2010), especially at the subnational level. Similar to how diseases spread, conflicts can be modeled using diffusion or network models (Dorussen, Gartzke and Westerwinter, 2016). Studies show that if neighboring regions experience conflict, nearby areas are also at risk in the future (Buhaug and Gleditsch, 2008). As a result, using lagged time and spatial data has become essential for forecast-ing models (Hegre et al., 2019). Besides autoregressive factors, variables such as GDP, population, ethnic exclusion (Metternich, Minhas and Ward, 2017), political instability (Iqbal and Starr, 2008), and variables extracted from new sources like remote sensors (Racek et al., 2024) also contribute to explaining conflict. To forecast conflict at a regional level, researchers have used advanced statistical techniques (Fritz et al., 2022), but also machine learning approaches (Bazzi et al., 2022) are increasingly common. Many of these models include spatial and temporal data by incorporating lagged values from neighboring areas using space and time-lagged vari-ables or derived variables like the sum of fatalities of the neighboring areas (Lindholm 6et al., 2022). However, forecasting conflict remains challenging, especially at finer geo-graphical scales, because conflict data is highly skewed, often with zero values. Despite improvements, most models still face performance issues due to limited flexibility. Arecent conflict forecasting competition by the Views team (Vesco et al., 2022) concluded that more flexible models tend to perform better. While newer approaches are reducing model rigidity, such as the non-parametric smoothing method used by Racek, Thurner and Kauermann (2024), they remain insufficient for fully capturing conflict dynam-ics. Models such as log-Gaussian Cox processes have been adapted for conflict studies (Zammit-Mangion et al., 2012), but their use remains limited: they focus primarily on the Afghan conflict and rely on WikiLeaks data, which is difficult to reproduce for global applications. In the last couple of years, deep learning models have gained popularity, like long short-term memory (LSTM) (Radford, 2022; von der Maase, 2025), or even temporal fusion transformers (Walterskirchen et al., 2024). Additionally, large language models are adapted to spatio-temporal patterns mining in other fields (Li et al., 2024; Zhang et al., 2024), and offer promising performances. However, those remain poor in inter-pretability and lack traceability in the predictions. In recent years, conflict forecasting studies have largely moved beyond country-level analyses. Some studies focus on the first or second-order administrative regions (Aas Rustad et al., 2011), but remain sparse. Most of them that employ finer ge-ographic scales rely on the Prio-Grid system (Tollefsen, Strand and Buhaug, 2012), which aggregates data, such as fatalities, into 0.5x0.5 degree cells (about 55x55 km at the equator). This system provides a consistent structure that offers a balance between geographic detail and the limited precision of event location data. Since conflict data is typically extracted from news reports, the exact locations are frequently vague or missing. Although UCDP includes information on geographic uncertainty that could 7be used to filter out imprecise events, most studies retain as many observations as pos-sible. Given that conflict events are relatively rare, the priority is typically maximizing the number of observations rather than improving spatial accuracy. The appropriate level of aggregation remains a point of debate in the conflict studies literature. (Cook and Weidmann, 2022). Despite promising results from new methods, predicting conflict at a fine geographic scale remains very difficult. The data is highly zero-inflated and skewed at the country level (Cederman and Weidmann, 2017), and this problem becomes worse at smaller scales, such as the Prio-Grid level. To illustrate how rare these events are, only 0.2% of observations in our study are non-zero. This extreme imbalance makes it hard to gather enough useful information in the training data to build an accurate model. As a result, most prediction models produce vague, smoothed outputs, similar to the results of convolutional smoothing in image processing. Figure 1 shows conflict predictions for the Kenya–Somalia border during the first half of 2023, from the current best open-source benchmark, the Violence & Impacts Early-Warning System (Views) (Fig. 1b).In the figure, we compare the forecast of the ShapeFinder (Fig. 1c) alongside the previous year’s cumulative fatalities used as model input (Fig. 1a) and the actual observed fatalities (Fig. 1d). Each colored square represents the cumulative fatalities in a PRIO grid cell—darker red indicates more fatalities; transparent cells had none. The Views forecast closely mirrors the input data, predicting high fatalities in the four cells in rows 4-5 and columns 5-6, and medium levels in surrounding cells, resembling the effect of a convolutional blur. This gives a general sense of where conflict might occur, but it results in clear overprediction. In this example, Views predicted 19 cells with more than seven fatalities, ShapeFinder predicted 8, and only 7 were actually observed. 8(a) Input data - Cumulated fatalities from January 2022 to December 2022 

> (b) Views Forecast data - Predicted Cumulated fatal-ities from January 2023 to June 2023
> (c) ShapeFinder Forecast data - Predicted Cumulated fatalities from January 2023 to June 2023
> (d) Observed data - Cumulated fatalities from January 2023 to June 2023

Figure 1: Conflict predictions for the Kenya–Somalia border during the first half of 2023, from Views (b), the ShapeFinder model (c) alongside the previous year’s cumulative fatalities used as model input (a) and the actual observed fatalities (d). Each colored square represents the cumulative fatalities in a PRIO grid cell—darker red indicates more fatalities; transparent cells had none. The numbers in the rows and columns are only included for reference and do not carry any meaning. 

3. The Prio-Grid problem 

The fine-scale geographic detail provided by the Prio-Grid scale demands greater flexibility compared to country-level models. A significant challenge lies in the key assumption of models with spatially lagged variables: the relationships between each Prio-Grid cell and its neighbors are uniform across the grid. This assumption often 9breaks down in practice. For example, a city like Cairo in Egypt spans several grid cells. If conflict arises within the city, fatalities in two or three neighboring cells might increase rapidly. However, assuming the same relationship between cells within Cairo as between cities like Yaoundé and Douala in Cameroon is difficult to justify. The dynamics of conflict propagation within a single urban area and between two distinct urban centers are not comparable. An effective model should account for these distinctions, treating Cairo as a single cohesive pole while recognizing Yaoundé and Douala as separate but interconnected nodes.    

> Figure 2: 3D sequences that happened at the border of Kenya and Somalia in 2022 (left section) and four similar cases found in the historical dataset by the model (right section). The 3D sequence uses longitude on the x-axis, latitude on the y-axis, and time on the z-axis. Each point represents the fatality value for a Prio-Grid cell in a specific month. Darker red points indicate higher fatality values, while gray links between points assist in visualizing the 3D structure but carry no interpretative meaning. Accompanying each 3D sequence is a map with accumulated fatalities over the period per Prio-Grid cell. The black grid represents the event’s location, and the colored squares indicate the total fatalities accumulated during the entire period within the Prio-Grid cells.

Figure 2 shows an example of an input 3D sequence that happened at the border of Kenya and Somalia in 2022 (left section), corresponding to the three-dimensional representation of the example presented in Figure 1. On the right section, the four most similar cases found by the model within the historical dataset are displayed. The 10 3D sequence uses longitude on the x-axis, latitude on the y-axis, and time on the z-axis. Each point represents the fatality value for a Prio-Grid cell in a specific month. Darker red points indicate higher fatality values, while gray links between points assist in visualizing the 3D structure but carry no interpretative meaning. Accompanying each 3D sequence is a map with accumulated fatalities over the period per Prio-Grid cell. Similarly to Figure 1 format, the black grid represents the event’s location, and the colored squares indicate the total fatalities accumulated during the period within the Prio-Grid cells. Across the five patterns, a consistent structure emerges: one cell or a small cluster of cells accounts for most fatalities, maintaining steady intensity over the entire period (highlighted in dotted red on the figure). Occasionally, spreads of conflict appear in surrounding cells, but they rarely persist for more than a few months. Visually, these patterns resemble a tree, where the core cells with constant fatalities form the trunk, and the short-term spreads constitute branches. Although the structures appear visually similar, detecting these patterns using a model is significantly challenging. One reason is the varying dimensions in latitude and longitude across the patterns: the Kenya-Somalia case is compact, while others, like Algeria or Mali-Niger, span multiple cells. Another complication is the difference in temporal durations: for example, the Egypt pattern extends over 16 months, whereas the Kenya-Somalia case lasts only 12 months. Additionally, the “trunk” structure varies considerably; in Somalia, it is concentrated in a single cell, while in Algeria, it spreads across two cells, and in Mali-Niger, it involves a group of four cells. Traditional models, which rely on fixed spatial and temporal lags or neighbor sums, would fail to adequately identify the underlying similarity between these patterns. As a simplified toy model, Figure 3 presents three patterns on a 5 ×5 grid over three months. As in the previous figure, the x-axis represents longitude, and the y-axis represents 11 latitude. The cell color indicates the number of fatalities per month, ranging from 0 (white) to 9 (dark red), with darker shades representing higher values. Visually, patterns 1 and 2 appear to have more similar dynamics, while pattern 3 is distinct, with constant values throughout the three months. However, when applying classical spatial regression methods to measure distances between patterns, the results indicate a smaller distance between patterns 1 and 3 than between patterns 1 and 2. In contrast, the flexible method introduced in this paper correctly identifies a smaller distance between patterns 1 and 2. Detailed calculations are provided in Appendix J. 

> Figure 3: Three patterns on a 5 ×5 grid over three months. The x-axis represents longitude, and the y-axis represents latitude. The cell color indicates the number of fatalities per month, ranging from 0 (white) to 9 (dark red), with darker shades representing higher values.

Incorporating flexibility into models is essential for matching cases with similar dy-namics despite differences in speed, scale, or frequency. This flexibility has shown clear 12 improvements even in single-dimensional models (Schincariol, Frank and Chadefaux, 2025), but when extended to three dimensions, its importance becomes even more pro-nounced. Events can vary in velocity across three axes—space and time—introducing additional layers of complexity that rigid models cannot capture. 

4. Data Creation 

Data source 

The data on conflict fatalities used in this study come from the Uppsala Conflict Data Program (UCDP) Georeferenced Event Dataset (GED) (Sundberg and Melander, 2013; Davies, Pettersson and Öberg, 2022). This dataset provides monthly data at the Prio-Grid level, covering the period from 1989 to the present. To validate our forecasting results, we compared them with the Views forecast ensemble model (Hegre et al., 2022), which is a leading benchmark in conflict prediction. The Views model is an ensemble model that includes various machine learning models, including a large number of covariates. Since the model only forecasts the state-based fatalities in the Middle East and Africa, our study focuses on these regions and variable to enable a direct comparison. The data was obtained through the Views API. 1

Active zones identification 

The first step of our model is to identify potential future zones of conflict by applying object-detection techniques from image analysis, like connected-component labeling and morphological erosion. The four steps of the method are represented in Figure 4. This process begins by examining the previous 12 months prior to the forecast period. Fatalities from the previous year are aggregated within each Prio-Grid cell, resulting in     

> 1The datasets f atalities 001 _2022 _00 _t01 ,f atalities 001 _2022 _06 _t01 ,
> f atalities 001 _2023 _00 _t01 ,f atalities 001 _2023 _06 _t01 , produced by Views are available here: https://github.com/prio-data/views_api/wiki/Available-datasets

13 a 2D grid where each cell contains the sum of fatalities for the year (Fig. 4a). The model then scans the grid using a rolling window across latitude and longitude to identify cells with non-zero values, referred to as “active” cells (Fig. 4b). 

> (a) Cumulated fatalities from January 2022 to Decem-ber 2022
> (b) Binary classification of active cell, with at least one cumulated conflict fatalities
> (c) Outcome of the Connected Component Labeling. The black borders outline the identified patterns.
> (d) Union-find patterns without filtered isolated cells by morphological erosion

Figure 4: Four steps of the identification of active conflict zone patterns in 2022 in Africa and the Middle East. The red shading represents the intensity of conflict, with darker red indicating higher numbers of fatalities in (a) and (d). 

Once the active cells are identified, Connected Component Labeling (CCL), a well-14 established technique in image analysis, is applied (Fig. 4c). CCL is commonly used in image analysis to detect and classify objects based on pixel connectivity. Once an active cell is identified, its neighboring cells within a 2-unit radius are examined. If a neighboring cell is also active, it is grouped into the same cluster. This iterative pro-cess continues until no additional active neighboring cells can be found. The resulting interconnected active cells are classified as ‘active conflict zone’. The radius is set to 2 units, corresponding to approximately 100km, allowing flexibility of the detection and remaining relatively close enough to have a link. The final step applies a modified ver-sion of morphological erosion and dilation (Fig. 4d). Erosion removes small structures by eroding object boundaries, eliminating minor, irrelevant details. Dilation expands objects, fills small gaps, and reconnects structures. These techniques are commonly used in remote sensing, such as for cloud detection, where erosion removes noisy pixels that may be mistaken for small clouds, and dilation merges fragmented cloud pixels into a coherent shape. Here, the erosion is applied by retaining only zones with more than one active cell. Indeed, as shown in Figure E.1, isolated active cells are associated with future conflict only 13% of the time and never diffuse to the neighboring cells. A spatial model would not be appropriate. However, these excluded cells may present opportunities for future work, such as applying a non-spatial autoregressive model as described in Schincariol, Frank and Chadefaux (2025), though their exclusion does not significantly impact the overall evaluation (see the Discussion section). The dilation is done by the union of entirely overlapping identified zones. If two or more active zones share some cells, the mean of the predictions is considered. Using this active zone identification method, 99% of the total fatalities and 94% of active cells are considered. The remaining 6% of active cells are isolated and not linked to any larger zones. This aggregation method provides a compromise between maxi-mizing the inclusion of relevant fatalities for effective model training and maintaining 15 computational efficiency. By doing so, the model remains capable of running in just a few hours. Further aspects of the impact of this selection are explored in Appendix H. 

Data transformation  

> Figure 5: Data transformation process illustrated through three steps. (1-left) Active zones are iden-tified in the previous 12-month aggregated 2D grid of active cells (2-middle) 3D sequences of linked neighboring cells with conflict fatalities are extracted and represented in a “molecular” format, where Longitude is on the x-axis, Latitude on the y-axis, and Time on the z-axis. Darker red shades indicate higher fatality values. Gray links between cells aid in 3D visualization but do not signify any mean-ingful connections. (3-right) The extracted sequences are transformed into density cubes, with each side representing a single normalized value and the intensity of conflict as the density value. As in (2), darker red indicates higher density values.

To implement our shape-matching method, the raw data undergoes a transformation process, as illustrated in Figure 5. After the active zones identification, we extract groups of conflict cells from the accumulated layers of 2D grids. The 2D zones are then disaggregated into a 3D sequences with Longitude and Latitude as the x-axis and y-axis, and month as the z-axis. A sequence example is shown in the middle part of the figure, where each colored point represents a Prio-Grid/month cell, with darker red indicating higher fatalities. The gray lines connecting the points are added for visual clarity and do not carry any specific meaning. In this example, the points are connected, forming 16 a sequence with two branches—one spanning longitudes 160 to 159 and the other from 157 to 155—both connected by a common base around time 33 to 35. Finally, the sequence is transformed into a density cube, as shown on the right side of the figure. The three axes: latitude, longitude, and time, are normalized from 0 to 1, and this spatial and temporal normalization includes non-active cells (those without fatalities) within the active zone. This spatial and time normalization allow the comparison of 3D sequences with different geographic and time dimensions. The total number of fatalities within the cells is also normalized so that their sum equals 1, similar to a standard density function, to apply the Earth Moving Distance (EMD) to measure the difference in shape between two sequences. This final step results in a cube with 1 unit per side, containing a 3D density distribution. 

5. Model Methodology 

The structure of the model is illustrated in Figure 6. The process begins with the extraction of sequence of interest (see Data transformation), referred to as input sequence in the figure. Next, the model searches for similar cases in the historical data using a rolling window. This involves calculating two distance metrics: the Earth Mover’s Distance (EMD) and the ratio of active cells (R). If both metrics fall below a defined threshold, the historical sequence is classified as similar to the input. Finally, the subsequent values associated with these similar cases are clustered to generate the forecast values. The definitions of key concept during the several steps of the modeling are included in Appendix G. 

Distance between two 3D Pattern 

The distance metrics for two 3D patterns combine two comparison factors: (1) the Earth Moving Distance (EMD) between the cubic density representations of the patterns, and (2) the ratio of cells with at least one conflict between the two patterns. 17 Figure 6: Diagram of the overall method of the model. First, we extracted the 3D sequence of interest as mentioned before, called input sequence in the figure. Then, we look for similar cases in the historical data using a rolling window, by calculating two distance metrics, Earth Moving Distance (EMD) and ratio of active cells (R). If those two metrics are lower than a threshold, the historical sequence is classified as a similar case to the input one. Finally, the values that follow similar cases are clustered to produce the forecast values. 

The Earth Mover’s Distance (EMD) (Andoni, Indyk and Krauthgamer, 2008) quan-tifies the similarity between two distributions. Initially developed for transportation logistics, it has been adapted for applications in image processing and computer vision. The metric evaluates the amount of work needed to transform one distribution into an-other. This is achieved by solving an optimal transport problem, minimizing the total cost required to transport the mass. The EMD is defined by the following equation: EMD (P, Q ) = min 

> γ∈Γ( P,Q )

X

> i,j

γij c(xi, y j ) (1) where: 18 • P and Q are the two distributions of points with non-null values for each pattern. 

• Γ( P, Q ) is the set of all possible joint distributions (couplings) with marginals P

and Q.

• γij represents the difference in normalized fatalities from xi to yj .

• c(xi, y j ) is the Euclidean distance between xi to yj .It is important to note that we compare each sequence not once but four times. The cubic density is rotated 90 ° around the time axis three times more because a sequence that starts in the southeast and ends in the northwest could be similar to one that starts in the southwest and ends in the northeast. The rotation is done around the time axis that remains fixed, as time progresses in only one direction. We take the minimum EMD value of the four sequence orientations. This distance metric allows us to identify similar sequences that may vary in duration and geographic spread—patterns that traditional models often fail to capture. By accommodating variations in both time and space, the method provides a more adaptive understanding of conflict dynamics, enabling the detection of similar cases that may be overlooked by classical models due to their rigidity. This flexibility is crucial for accurately analyzing complex phenomena where the timing and geographic extent of events can differ significantly. The second part of the ratio of active cells (R) of the two sequences. An active cell is a Prio-Grid month observation that has a non-zero value. The R ratio is defined by the following equation: R = tanh 



log 

Np1

Np2

 

(2) where: 

• Np1, Np2 is the number of conflict active cells in the first and second sequence 19 • R is the Ratio of Active Cells 

• tanh is the hyperbolic tangent function EMD alone does not account for the counts of conflicts or whether the sequences have a similar number of active cells, those with non-zero fatalities. Thus, two sequences could have similar shapes (low EMD) but very different counts of active cells. Although the model assumes that sequences with different magnitudes are comparable, it does not equate cells with zero fatalities to those with a small number of fatalities. The Ratio of Active Cells function 2 is equal to zero when the ratio Np1 

> Np2

is equal to 1. It increases in the same way whether the ratio is negative or positive, which removes the need to control the numerator and denominator separately. The first factor ensures that the overall shapes of the patterns are similar, while the second ensures that both patterns have a comparable number of active conflict cells. By combining both factors, this method provides a more comprehensive and reliable approach to pattern matching. Two patterns are considered similar if they fall below two critical threshold values. 

Search for similar patterns in the historical data 

To identify similar historical cases for a given input sequence, we use a rolling window method, as detailed in 7. Input sequences (highlighted in red in the figure) are compared to historical sequences spanning from southwestern Africa in 1989 to the northeastern Middle East in the final month of the training set (for example, December 2021 for the first test period, which forecasts January to June 2022). The rolling window moves sequentially through longitude, latitude, and time. For instance, the first historical sequence to be compared covers 0 longitude to i,0 latitude to j, and 0 time to k, where i, j, k are the dimensions of the input. The next sequence shifts by half the size of the longitude dimension, from (i/ 2) longitude to 20 Figure 7: Rolling Window Scheme for historical search. The red cube represents the input sequence, while the gray cubes show the historical dataset, covering a range from 0 to n in longitude, 0 to m in latitude, and 0 to o in time. The dark green cube represents a similar case to the input, with the light green cube showing its following values. 

i + ( i/ 2) , while keeping latitude and time fixed. This process repeats similarly through the latitude and time axes. By shifting the window by half the dimension size, we minimize overlap between patterns and shorten computation time. For each iteration of the rolling window, sequences with similar dimensions (longi-tude, latitude, and time) are compared, but also sequences of ±1/4 in each dimension. If a historical sequence meets the similarity criteria, it is marked as similar (dark green in the figure), and its subsequent values, referred to as “past future” throughout the paper (light green in the figure), are stored. The outcome of the rolling window is a set of similar sequences and their following values. 

Forecast creation 

The forecast values are generated using the “past future” of similar historical se-quences. This process has two main steps: (1) reshaping the past future values to fit the input dimensions, and (2) clustering and identifying the most likely scenario. Be-cause we allow comparing sequences with different dimensions, some similar sequences 21 of the same pattern may differ in size. Extending a sequence is done by multiplying dimensions, while larger sequences are shrunk by dividing dimensions to fit the input size. Forecast values are then adjusted to align with the closest matching grid cells. If multiple values fall in the same cell, they are added together.     

> Figure 8: Example of scenario creation using clustering. The 3D sequence uses longitude on the x-axis, latitude on the y-axis, and time on the z-axis. Each point represents the fatality value for a Prio-Grid cell in a specific month. Darker red points indicate higher fatality values, while gray links between points assist in visualizing the 3D structure but carry no interpretative meaning. Three similar patterns were identified in the historical data (left) and created two scenarios (right) with their associated probability, based on the number of observations in each cluster.

Next, we apply clustering on past futures to find the most probable forecast sce-nario. After mapping each sequence’s projection to longitude, latitude, and time, we calculate the Euclidean distance between these projections and cluster them based on a set threshold distance. Similarly to the previous distance parameters, the clustering threshold was established based on a parameter grid search to minimize the evaluation metrics of the validation set. Scenarios are then created by grouping the values by clus-ter using the mean value for each cell point (longitude, latitude, month). The number 22 of observations per cluster estimates the probability of observing this outcome emerge when this pattern appears. The forecasted value is then the mean value of the cluster with the most observations, representing the most probable future scenario. Figure 8 presents an example of scenario creation using clustering. Three similar sequences were identified in the historical data (left). The two upper patterns have a distance below the defined threshold (indicated by the dotted line), and are then grouped together to form a scenario with a probability p=2/3. As this is the most probable scenario, it is selected as the forecast value. This step helps mitigate the influence of outliers, which could heavily weight the prediction with extreme values that rarely have occurred in history. 

6. Evaluation 

Benchmark model 

We evaluate our model, labeled as ‘ShapeFinder’(SF), by comparing it to the leading benchmark in the field, the Views forecast ensemble model (Hegre et al., 2022). This model is one of the few that provides a publicly available monthly point forecast at the grid level. It forecasts up to 36 months ahead for the Middle East and Africa, starting from January 2022. 2 Our evaluation is conducted across four 6-month periods: 

• January to June 2022, using data up to December 2021. 

• July to December 2022, using data up to June 2022. 

• January to June 2023, using data up to December 2022. 

• July to December 2023, using data up to June 2023. 

> 2It is important to note that their model is optimized with 36-month horizons, and these predicted values are actually live predictions.

23 These intervals provide a balance between a long enough forecast horizon and suffi-cient observations. A six-month horizon, half the length of the 12-month input window, offers the best trade-off between dynamic prediction reliability and the potential op-erational utility. A shorter, three-month horizon may not be sufficient for a warning system, while a 12-month horizon likely exceeds the theoretically temporal limits of reliable dynamic prediction. 

Metrics 

The models’ performance is measured using three metrics. The first is the Mean Squared Error (MSE) at the Prio-Grid level, the most common metric in forecasting. MSE measures the average prediction error but does not account for flexibility in ge-ography or time. It simply checks if the forecast at time t for Prio-Grid p is accurate. The formula for MSE is: 

M SE = 1

n

> n

X

> i=1

(Yi − ˆYi)2 (3) With Yi the observed value and ˆYi the predicted value. However, because Prio-Grid is a very fine-grained geographic scale, this metric alone can be misleading. For example, a forecast of 1,000 fatalities in cell c1 when the actual number is 1,000 in the neighboring cell c2 results in a large penalty (an error of +1,000 in c1 and –1,000 in c2), even though the prediction is only off by 55 km. For policymakers, such a small spatial imprecision is still highly valuable. To address this issue, two additional zone-level (defined in Fig.4) metrics were introduced. These capture the total number of fatalities within the zone over the forecast period, following the approach used by the ConflictForecast team (Mueller, Rauh and Seimon, 2024), which evaluates 3-month and 12-month cumulative fatalities. These metrics provide a clearer overview of forecast quality without penalizing the model for small temporal or spatial shifts. Potential users are typically more interested in whether fatalities will occur in the zone 24 over the next six months than in perfect monthly alignment. To complement these measures and assess the predicted dynamics, the EMD is also used as an evaluation metric. Combined, these three metrics, active zone accumulated fatalities error, EMD for assessing dynamic similarity, and Prio-Grid MSE for fine-grained accuracy, offer a comprehensive evaluation of both overall trends and detailed spatial performance. To extend the analysis from forecasting evaluation, we need to characterize a se-quence and its relationship with its future values. For this, we introduce a metric called ratio of increase ( Rinc ), which quantifies the difference in the number of fatalities be-tween a sequence and its past future. This metric helps assess whether a pattern leads to an escalation, stabilization, or decline in conflict intensity. The formula for Rinc is: 

Rinc =

P f at pf 

P f at sequence 

(4) With P f at pf the sum of fatalities in the past future section, and P f at sequence the sum of fatalities in the pattern. 

Parameters optimization 

The three parameters of the model, the EMD threshold, the R threshold thr 2, and the cluster distance clu d are selected with a grid-search on a validation set from January to June 2021, using data up to December 2020 in the training set, minimizing the MSE at the Prio-Grid level. The parameters that lead to the best performance are thr 1 = 0 .15 

and thr 2 = 0 .05 , and cluster distance clu d = 0 .0054 ∗ Ndim where Ndim is the number of Prio-Grid monthly elements in the forecasted sequence. 25 Figure 9: Outcome of the ShapeFinder model for the Kenya-Somalia example, discussed in Figure 2. Four examples of past futures, and the corresponding Forecasted and Observed values. The left side of the figure displays four “following values” examples (also referred to as past futures) of similar historical sequences. The right side of the figure represents the forecasted and actual observed values. The 3D sequence uses longitude on the x-axis, latitude on the y-axis, and time on the z-axis. Each point represents the fatality value for a Prio-Grid cell in a specific month. Darker red points indicate higher fatality values, while gray links between points assist in visualizing the 3D structure but carry no interpretative meaning. Accompanying each 3D sequence is a map with accumulated fatalities over the period per Prio-Grid cell. The black grid represents the event’s location, and the colored squares indicate the total fatalities accumulated during the entire period within the Prio-Grid cells. 

7. Results 

Patterns and Past Futures 

Figure 9 illustrates the Kenya-Somalia example, discussed in Figure 2. The left side of the figure displays four “following values” examples (also referred to as past futures) of similar historical sequences. These examples are extracted from the most probable scenario, which includes ten sequences in total. The right side of the figure compares the forecasted and actual observed values. The forecasted values are constructed with the following values of similar historical sequences shown on the left. This pattern’s occurrences share a common dynamic: most fatalities are concentrated in a couple of 26 Prio-Grid cells, located on the right side of the sequence. The sequences also have a secondary zone of fatalities, more minor. In some cases, this secondary zone is concen-trated within one or two cells on the left part, while in others, it appears more diffusely distributed around the primary zone of concentration. The resulting forecast mirrors the observed values to a significant extent, correctly predicting the concentration of fatalities in two cells along the coast near the border. However, while the observed values reveal a cluster of fatalities in the south, this area is slightly underpredicted in the prediction. Instead, the model forecasts a more diffuse spread of fatalities around the two primary cells, failing to capture the precise secondary cluster. More examples of forecasted projections of fatalities from the SF model and the Views model against the actual observed values are included in Figure B.1. 

Meaningful patterns ? 

A shape-based forecasting model operates on the assumption that similar occur-rences of a pattern lead to similar outcomes. To evaluate this assumption, we examine whether the similarity of past futures between two sequences correlates with their dis-tance. For this, we analyze all sequences in the study and compare them against his-torically recorded sequences that share comparable dimensions and active cell counts. We measure both the sequences’ similarity metric EMD ( EM D pattern ) but also the differences in their ratio of increase ( ∆Rinc ) and EMD for their past futures ( EM D pf ). Figure 10 presents the results, where values are binned for clarity. The mean and 95% confidence interval for each bin are displayed for Rinc (left) and EM D pf (right). Both Rinc and EM D pf of the smaller bin are significantly smaller (except the 0.25-0.3 bin for ∆Rinc ). Generally, when EM D pattern increases, Rinc and EM D pf increases too. It confirms that more similar patterns tend to produce more similar outcomes (past futures), validating the model’s core assumption. 27 Figure 10: The mean and 95% confidence interval for sequences’ similarity metric EM D pattern (x-axis) and the differences in their ratio of increase ∆Rinc on the left part and EMD for their past futures  

> EM D pf on the right (y-axis). The confidence interval is computed as the standard error divided by the square root of the number of observations.

Prediction at the Prio-Grid level 

First, the Prio-Grid cell is the unit of analysis. In this section, we compare the model results at the micro-level, providing insight into the prediction performance at the smallest geographical grain of analysis. Figure 11 shows the log ratio of Mean Squared Error (MSE) between the Views model and the ShapeFinder (SF) model at the Prio-Grid level. The units in the two subfigures (bottom left of the figure) are the metrics calculated for the 6-month pre-diction period and Prio-Grid. Across the four periods analyzed, approximately 1,500 Prio-Grid cells per period (totaling just over 6,000 cells) are included. A positive ratio (in red) indicates that the ShapeFinder model outperforms the Views model. Over-all, the SF model demonstrates significantly better performance, with an average log ratio of 0.05. The median log ratio is positive, and in total, the SF model shows im-provements in over 62% of cases. However, many of these improvements are minor, as indicated by the substantial number of points included in the histogram bin from 0 to 1. Along with this, a map displays cumulative MSE per cell over four analysis periods. 28 Figure 11: Log ratio of Mean Squared Error (MSE) between the Views model and the ShapeFinder (SF) model at the Prio-Grid level and Mean and 95% of the Confidence level, calculated with the standard error divided by the square root of the number of observations. The units in the two subfigures (bottom left of the figure) are the metrics calculated for the 6-month prediction period and Prio-Grid. Along with this, the map (center of the figure) displays cumulative MSE per cell over four analysis periods. Red indicates better performance by the SF model, blue by the Views model, and gray denotes similar predictions. 

Red indicates better performance by the SF model, blue by the Views model, and gray denotes similar predictions. The Views model performs better in northern Iraq, the Central African Republic, and the Chad-Nigeria border. Mixed results appear in Burk-ina Faso, the DRC-Rwanda border, and Somalia. Finally, ShapeFinder outperforms in Yemen, Nigeria, central Ethiopia, and Syria. Appendix F presents the detailed error metrics for each forecast horizon and test period, and Appendix A provides examples 29 of the model’s predictions. 

Prediction at the Zone level 

In complement, this section focuses on the macro-level results by analyzing the model’s performance at the zone level, as discussed in Figure 4. This approach is more relevant for early warning applications, as it considers entire zones rather than isolated grid cells. By capturing broader conflict dynamics, this level of analysis provides a more meaningful foundation for decision-making and risk assessment. 

> Figure 12: Scatter plot of the log ratio of Raw Error (in x) and EMD (in y) at the zone level, as intro-duced in Figure 4, of Views model over ShapeFinder model. If the ratio is positive, the ShapeFinder model shows better performance. The red point is the mean value with the 95% Confidence Interval, calculated with the standard error divided by the square root of the number of observations.

Figure 12 presents the log ratio of Mean Average Error (MAE) (x-axis) and EMD (y-axis) at the pattern level, comparing the Views model to the ShapeFinder (SF) model. A positive ratio indicates that the SF model outperforms the Views model. The results demonstrate that the SF model outperforms in both MAE (average log ratio = 0.708) 30 and EMD (average log ratio = 0.120), achieving the most accurate predictions for total fatalities and dynamic patterns. In total, 111 patterns are included across the four periods. Appendix Appendix B shows examples of projections and forecast maps to further illustrate these findings. 

Performance analysis 

To assess where and why the SF model outperforms, we examine three characteristics of the 111 identified active zones across the four studied periods. First, we analyze how an input sequence evolves in terms of the intensity of fatalities using the ratio of increase 

Rinc . Second, we evaluate two performance measures: the prediction performance of Views (using the Mean Absolute Percentage Error, MAPE) and the relative difference in performance between Views and the SF model (log ratio of error). These metrics allow us to identify regions where Views performs poorly and to determine whether the SF model minimizes these errors, showing clearly areas where the SF model contributes improvements. Figure 13 illustrates the relationship between the input sequence’s increase ratio 

Rinc (x-axis), the Mean Average Percentage Error (MAPE) of the Views model (y-axis) with a log-modulus transformation, and the error ratio of both models (indicated by color). In the figure, darker red areas show where the SF model performs better, while darker blue areas indicate better performance by the Views model. As expected, inputs where the Views model has strong MAPE performances (around the 0-line on the y-axis) also show a negative error ratio (in blue), indicating better performance for Views. Beyond this, we can see three main groups of inputs. First, there is a group of dark red points with Rinc value from 0 to 0.5, where the Views model overpredicts significantly (with MAPE values above 2). The second group includes light red points with Rinc 

value up to 2, where Views slightly overpredicts. Finally, there is a group of very pale red and blue points with Rinc value above 3, where both models underpredict (negative 31 Figure 13: Scatter plot of the ratio of increase Rinc (in x) and Mean Average Percentage Error (MAPE) of Views (in y) at the active zone level, with a log-modulus transformation. The color of the point represents the difference in performance between the two models. The darker red, the SF performs better, and the darker blue, the Views model. 

MAPE values). These are the hardest patterns to forecast, as they involve sudden, large increases in fatalities, and both models underpredict similarly here. Overall, it appears that the SF model’s improvement comes mainly in cases where the Views model overpredicts. An important question is then whether the SF model achieves its strong MSE and Absolute Error scores simply by making conservative predictions. Metrics like these can favor models that produce conservative prediction values, especially in conflict forecasting at a fine scale (monthly, grid-level), where most values are zero. However, Figures C.1 and C.2 show the MAPE and Maximum Error, respectively. These reveal that the SF model strikes a balance between under- and over-predictions. Interestingly, its maximum forecast values are even higher in mean and median than those of the Views model. This suggests that the SF model provides more accurate and higher-32 scoring predictions without relying on overly conservative estimates.  

> Figure 14: Scatter plots showing the relationship between input sequence characteristics and prediction error at the zone level using the ShapeFinder model. The y-axis in all three plots represents the Mean Absolute Percentage Error (MAPE), with a log-modulus transformation, where positive values indicate overpredictions and negative values indicate underpredictions. The x-axes represent: (left) the ratio of increase Rinc , (center) the total number of fatalities in the input pattern (referred to as Magnitude), and (right) the number of active cells in the pattern (referred to as Dimension). The dotted horizontal line at 0 on the y-axis indicates a perfect prediction.

More detailed plots of the SF performances are displayed in Figure 14. It shows the relationship between pattern characteristics and prediction error at the pattern level using the ShapeFinder model. The y-axis in all three plots represents the Mean Absolute Percentage Error (MAPE), with a log-modulus transformation, where positive values indicate overpredictions and negative values indicate underpredictions. The x-axes represent: (left) the ratio of increase Rinc , (center) the total number of fatalities in the input pattern (referred to as Magnitude), and (right) the number of active cells in the pattern (referred to as Dimension). The dotted horizontal line at 0 on the y-axis indicates a perfect prediction. Similarly to the Views, all of the overpredictions are situated when Rinc is inferior to 2. However, they also correspond to high magnitude input patterns and medium dimension size patterns (from 30 to 100 active cells). The underpredictions are more uniformly distributed and less important in values than overpredictions. 33 8. Discussion 

In this paper, we introduce a novel method for identifying conflict dynamics at a fine-grained geographic level. It shows strong forecasting performances, overperforming the Views model, one of the strongest benchmarks, at both micro and macro levels. A deeper analysis of our model’s performance shows that it might offer a more precise forecasted dynamic. It seems that the Views model captures the general area where fatalities might occur but lacks precision within that area, often leading to overpre-dictions. The EMD metric supports this, indicating that our model better pinpoints specific locations. This difference is also clear in Figure B.1, where aggregated fore-casts show that our model provides a more refined pattern, while Views predicts broad, vague clouds of activity. But, as noted in the Benchmark section, the Views model is optimized for a 36-month forecast horizon. If it were optimized for a shorter 6-month horizon, its results might differ significantly. However, this method is based on several assumptions. The primary assumption is that patterns of different magnitudes in geography and intensity are comparable. While studies have shown that this approach works at larger scales, such as country-month analyses (Schincariol, Frank and Chadefaux, 2025), its effectiveness at smaller scales, as explored in this study, requires further investigation 3. Future work could adopt a more theory-driven approach, using the model to examine patterns associated with specific variables such as conflict type or commonly used covariates in conflict modeling. More-over, while this study is limited to Africa and the Middle East, future research could explore cross-regional pattern similarity and extend the model to a broader geographic scope. In addition to this future innovation, another possible direction is to move away from 

> 3The results were also compared with the original method, showing better forecasting performances. The results are presented in Appendix I

34 the Prio-Grid system. UCDP provides information on geographic accuracy, which would allow the model to retain only events with high spatial precision. However, removing imprecise events introduces a new problem: if the excluded events involve large numbers of fatalities, their absence could substantially change the overall shape and produce an entirely different pattern. An alternative approach would be to keep the best estimate of the precise location and replace the cubic density measure with a cylindrical density measure, using only latitude and longitude as the geographic dimensions. But similarly, the geographic imprecision of a heavy fatalities event might alter the pattern shape. The prediction procedure itself can also be adapted in future work. The conflict forecasting field is moving away from point estimates (Randahl, Williams and Hegre, 2024), as illustrated by the most recent Views competition (Hegre et al., 2024), where participants were required to submit full probability distributions rather than single-value forecasts. The ShapeFinder can be adapted in this direction by shifting from scenario generation to estimating a predictive distribution for each cell-month, based on the future values observed in similar historical cases. Further research is needed to determine both the appropriate statistical distribution (the country-month forecasts in the competition used a Poisson distribution) and the optimal balance between the number of similar cases required and the distance thresholds used to classify two 3D sequences as similar ( thr 1 and thr 2 in Figure 6). Fitting a full distribution will likely require a larger set of similar historical sequences, which may affect the choice of these thresholds. Besides significant strengths, the model faces some limitations. First, even if the model is highly flexible, it assumes that the diffusion of conflict to neighboring areas is equally probable. In reality, this is not the case, as factors such as logistics (e.g., roads connecting cells) and human communication networks, which might link distant neighbors more closely than geographically closer ones due to differences in religion, 35 culture, etc., play a significant role. Addressing these factors would require a major overhaul of the model, including the incorporation of road networks and population data for each cell. This would add considerable complexity to the model and necessitate a large amount of data. Then, a key advantage of the original ShapeFinder model that is reduced in this adaptation is its strong interpretability. The two-dimensional country-level patterns make it possible to draw conclusions about how a specific shape might lead to outcome y or z, since the structure of the shape can be directly examined. In the model presented in this paper, which relies on three dimensions, and even four if we include fatalities as an additional dimension, this interpretability is strongly limited. Humans struggle to intuitively understand three-dimensional shapes, especially when they are projected onto a flat page, making it difficult to see what the shape represents or to judge its similarity to others. The only aspect of interpretability that remains clear in this version is traceability: the ability to identify where and when similar patterns occurred in the historical data. This still enables meaningful contextual analysis, even if the shapes themselves are harder to interpret. Another limitation of our model is that, because the model is fully autoregressive, it cannot forecast conflict in zones where no conflict has occurred in the recent past. However, unlike the original country-level ShapeFinder, where the inability to predict onsets was an explicit limitation, this constraint is only partially applicable here. Cells that are currently non-active but fall within an active zone can still be forecasted as non-zero, even if they recorded only zeros in the previous months. In this sense, the current version of ShapeFinder resembles a hurdle model, similar to the approach in Fritz, Dworschak and Mehrl (2024). The difference is that, instead of using a separate model to identify which zones require forecasting, we include all zones that recorded fatalities in the previous 12 months. As a result, the inability to forecast onsets applies 36 only to cells outside these active zones. The results included in Appendix H show that this zone detection method allows for capturing most of the future fatalities, confirming the purely autoregressive com-patibility for active conflict, meaning that active conflict seems to remain in the same active zones. However, we also see that the onsets of fatalities corresponding to around 10% of the fatalities are impossible to capture. Predicting these spikes is challenging for all models, even those with additional data. This is clear in Figure 13, where the Views model underpredicts values when the increase ratio is above 3. In those zones, predicting zero remains the best strategy for optimizing the error metrics (see Figure H.2). This raises a question of the useful metrics to assess our models. A general model optimized on the error is unlikely to predict an onset of conflict, as the reward is too low compared to the error risk of forecasting such a rare event. However, a key expectation of forecasting models from decision-makers is to detect those early warning signals to ideally avoid conflict onsets. The solution could be to develop hurdle models that are assessed on both error in active conflict zones and a highly rewarding onset metric for non-active zones. 

Conclusion 

Our model demonstrates strong forecasting performance with the added benefit of transparency. Its main asset is the traceability of the source of each forecast. Contrary to highly complex machine learning models, our approach allows us to trace the origins of each forecast, showing when similar patterns occurred in the past and the likelihood of different future scenarios. This makes the model transparent, an important advantage for convincing decision-makers of its reliability. Moreover, it can run quickly (about one hour per period) compared to the much longer processing times of deep learning methods, and only needs fatality input data to run. 37 Acknowledgements 

This project has received funding from the European Research Council (ERC) un-der the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme (grant agreement No 101002240) 

CRediT authorship contribution statement 

Thomas Schincariol: Conceptualization; Data curation; Formal analysis; Methodol-ogy; Software; Validation; Visualization; Writing - original draft; and Writing - review & editing 38 Declaration of competing interest 

The authors declare that they have no competing interests. 

Declaration of Generative AI in the writing process 

I used ChatGPT to assist with grammar and spelling corrections, translations, and synonym suggestions during the preparation of this work. I reviewed and edited all content afterward and take full responsibility for the final manuscript. 39 References 

Aas Rustad, Siri Camilla, Halvard Buhaug, Åshild Falch and Scott Gates. 2011. “All conflict is local: Modeling sub-national variation in civil conflict risk.” Conflict Man-agement and Peace Science 28(1):15–40. ACLED. 2025. “ACLED Conflict Alert System (CAST).” Armed Conflict Location and Event Data (ACLED). Available at: https://acleddata.com/platform/cast-conflict-alert-system (accessed 9 December 2025). Andoni, Alexandr, Piotr Indyk and Robert Krauthgamer. 2008. Earth mover distance over high-dimensional spaces. In SODA . Vol. 8 pp. 343–352. Bazzi, Samuel, Robert A Blair, Christopher Blattman, Oeindrila Dube, Matthew Gud-geon and Richard Peck. 2022. “The promise and pitfalls of conflict prediction: evi-dence from Colombia and Indonesia.” Review of Economics and Statistics 104(4):764– 779. Black, Nathan. 2013. “When have violent civil conflicts spread? Introducing a dataset of substate conflict contagion.” Journal of Peace Research 50(6):751–759. Buhaug, Halvard and Kristian Skrede Gleditsch. 2008. “Contagion or confusion? Why conflicts cluster in space.” International studies quarterly 52(2):215–233. Cederman, Lars-Erik and Nils B Weidmann. 2017. “Predicting armed conflict: Time to adjust our expectations?” Science 355(6324):474–476. Cook, Scott J, Jude C Hays and Robert J Franzese Jr. 2023. “Stadl up! the spatiotem-poral autoregressive distributed lag model for tscs data analysis.” American Political Science Review 117(1):59–79. 40 Cook, Scott J and Nils B Weidmann. 2022. “Race to the bottom: Spatial aggregation and event data.” International Interactions 48(3):471–491. Corso, Gabriele, Hannes Stark, Stefanie Jegelka, Tommi Jaakkola and Regina Barzilay. 2024. “Graph neural networks.” Nature Reviews Methods Primers 4(1):17. Davies, Shawn, Therese Pettersson and Magnus Öberg. 2022. “Organized violence 1989–2021 and drone warfare.” Journal of Peace Research 59(4):593–610. Davis, Louis, Boris Baeumer and Ting Wang. 2024. “A fractional Hawkes process model for earthquake aftershock sequences.” Journal of the Royal Statistical Society Series C: Applied Statistics 73(5):1185–1202. Dorussen, Han, Erik A Gartzke and Oliver Westerwinter. 2016. “Networked interna-tional politics: Complex interdependence and the diffusion of conflict and peace.” 

Journal of peace research 53(3):283–291. Fayaz, Sheikh Amir, Majid Zaman, Sameer Kaul and Muheet Ahmed Butt. 2022. “Is deep learning on tabular data enough? An assessment.” International Journal of Advanced Computer Science and Applications 13(4):466–473. Forsberg, Erika. 2014. “Diffusion in the study of civil wars: A cautionary tale.” Inter-national Studies Review 16(2):188–198. Fritz, Cornelius, Christoph Dworschak and Marius Mehrl. 2024. “Predicting uncer-tainty in stages: Using a semiparametric hierarchical hurdle model for predicting distributions of conflict fatalities.”. Fritz, Cornelius, Marius Mehrl, Paul W Thurner and Göran Kauermann. 2022. “The role of governmental weapons procurements in forecasting monthly fatalities in intrastate 41 conflicts: A semiparametric hierarchical hurdle model.” International Interactions 

48(4):778–799. Hawkes, Alan G. 1971. “Spectra of some self-exciting and mutually exciting point processes.” Biometrika 58(1):83–90. Hegre, Håvard, Marie Allansson, Matthias Basedau, Michael Colaresi, Mihai Croicu, Hanne Fjelde, Frederick Hoyles, Lisa Hultman, Stina Högbladh, Remco Jansen et al. 2019. “ViEWS: A political violence early-warning system.” Journal of peace research 

56(2):155–174. Hegre, Håvard et al. 2024. “The 2023/24 VIEWS Prediction challenge: Predicting the number of fatalities in armed conflict, with uncertainty.” Journal of Peace Research 

p. 00223433241300862. Hegre, Håvard, Angelica Lindqvist-McGowan, James Dale, Mihai Croicu, David Ran-dahl and Paola Vesco. 2022. “Forecasting fatalities in armed conflict: Forecasts for April 2022-March 2025.”. Iqbal, Zaryab and Harvey Starr. 2008. “Bad neighbors: Failed states and their conse-quences.” Conflict Management and Peace Science 25(4):315–331. Kathman, Jacob D. 2010. “Civil war contagion and neighboring interventions.” Inter-national Studies Quarterly 54(4):989–1012. Kelling, Claire and YiJyun Lin. 2020. “Analysis of Conflict Diffusion Over Continuous Space.” Computational Conflict Research pp. 201–223. Kibris, Arzu. 2021. “The geo-temporal evolution of violence in civil conflicts: A micro analysis of conflict diffusion on a new event data set.” Journal of Peace Research 

58(5):885–899. 42 Li, Zhonghang, Lianghao Xia, Jiabin Tang, Yong Xu, Lei Shi, Long Xia, Dawei Yin and Chao Huang. 2024. Urbangpt: Spatio-temporal large language models. In Proceedings of the 30th ACM SIGKDD Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining .pp. 5351–5362. Lindholm, Andreas, Johannes Hendriks, Adrian Wills and Thomas B Schön. 2022. “Predicting political violence using a state-space model.” International Interactions 

48(4):759–777. Metternich, Nils W, Shahryar Minhas and Michael D Ward. 2017. “Firewall? Or wall on fire? A unified framework of conflict contagion and the role of ethnic exclusion.” 

Journal of Conflict Resolution 61(6):1151–1173. Mueller, Hannes, Christopher Rauh and Ben Seimon. 2024. “Introducing a global dataset on conflict forecasts and news topics.” Data & Policy 6:e17. Racek, Daniel, Paul Thurner and Goeran Kauermann. 2024. Integrating Spatio-temporal Diffusion into Statistical Forecasting Models of Armed Conflict via Non-parametric Smoothing. Technical report Center for Open Science. Racek, Daniel, Paul W Thurner, Brittany I Davidson, Xiao Xiang Zhu and Göran Kauermann. 2024. “Conflict forecasting using remote sensing data: An application to the Syrian civil war.” International Journal of Forecasting 40(1):373–391. Racek, Daniel, Paul W Thurner and Göran Kauermann. 2025. “Capturing the spatio-temporal diffusion effects of armed conflict: A nonparametric smoothing approach.” 

Journal of the Royal Statistical Society Series A: Statistics in Society p. qnaf120. Radford, Benjamin J. 2022. “High resolution conflict forecasting with spatial convolu-tions and long short-term memory.” International Interactions 48(4):739–758. 43 Randahl, David, Jonathan P Williams and Håvard Hegre. 2024. “Bin-Conditional Conformal Prediction of Fatalities from Armed Conflict.” arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.14507 .Reinhart, Alex. 2018. “A review of self-exciting spatio-temporal point processes and their applications.” Statistical Science 33(3):299–318. Reinhart, Alex and Joel Greenhouse. 2018. “Self-exciting point processes with spatial covariates: modelling the dynamics of crime.” Journal of the Royal Statistical Society Series C: Applied Statistics 67(5):1305–1329. Saideman, Stephen M. 2012. “When conflict spreads: Arab spring and the limits of diffusion.” International Interactions 38(5):713–722. Schincariol, Thomas, Hannah Frank and Thomas Chadefaux. 2025. “Accounting for variability in conflict dynamics: A pattern-based predictive model.” Journal of Peace Research p. 00223433251330790. Schutte, Sebastian and Nils B Weidmann. 2011. “Diffusion patterns of violence in civil wars.” Political Geography 30(3):143–152. Shwartz-Ziv, Ravid and Amitai Armon. 2022. “Tabular data: Deep learning is not all you need.” Information Fusion 81:84–90. Sundberg, Ralph and Erik Melander. 2013. “Introducing the UCDP georeferenced event dataset.” Journal of Peace Research 50(4):523–532. Tollefsen, Andreas Forø, Håvard Strand and Halvard Buhaug. 2012. “PRIO-GRID: A unified spatial data structure.” Journal of Peace Research 49(2):363–374. Vesco, Paola, Håvard Hegre, Michael Colaresi, Remco Bastiaan Jansen, Adeline Lo, 44 Gregor Reisch and Nils B Weidmann. 2022. “United they stand: Findings from an escalation prediction competition.” International Interactions 48(4):860–896. von der Maase, Simon P. 2025. “Next-Generation Conflict Forecasting: Unleashing Pre-dictive Patterns through Spatiotemporal Learning.” arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.14817 

.Walterskirchen, Julian, Sonja Häffner, Christian Oswald and Marco Nicola Binetti. 2024. “Taking time seriously: Predicting conflict fatalities using temporal fusion transformers.”. Weidmann, Nils B. 2015. “On the accuracy of media-based conflict event data.” Journal of Conflict Resolution 59(6):1129–1149. Yu, Bing, Haoteng Yin and Zhanxing Zhu. 2017. “Spatio-temporal graph convolu-tional networks: A deep learning framework for traffic forecasting.” arXiv preprint arXiv:1709.04875 .Zammit-Mangion, Andrew, Michael Dewar, Visakan Kadirkamanathan and Guido San-guinetti. 2012. “Point process modelling of the Afghan War Diary.” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 109(31):12414–12419. Zhang, Zheng, Hossein Amiri, Zhenke Liu, Liang Zhao and Andreas Züfle. 2024. Large language models for spatial trajectory patterns mining. In Proceedings of the 1st ACM SIGSPATIAL International Workshop on Geospatial Anomaly Detection . pp. 52–55. 45 Appendix A. Example of forecast : Prio-Grid level 

> (a) Best performing cases
> (b) Worse performing cases

Figure A.1: Examples of best (top) and worst (bottom) Prio-Grid MSE scores. The red line is the SF values, the grey is Views, and the black is the observed values. 

46 Appendix B. Example of forecast : Pattern level 

> (a) Lake Chad area - Jan-June 2022
> (b) North Mozambique - July-Dec 2023
> (c) Levant Region - Jan-June 2022
> (d) North Iraq - Jan-June 2022

Figure B.1: Examples of four Pattern ShapeFinder Forecast (left), Views Forecast (middle), and Observed values (right). The darker the red, the higher the fatality value. The values are aggregated per Prio-Grid over the 6-month period. 

47 Appendix C. Under/over prediction robustness test 

Figure C.1: Boxplot of the Mean Average Percentage Error (MAPE) for both models, SF and Views. A positive value corresponds to an overprediction, in contrast to a negative value. 

Figure C.2: Boxplot of the Maximum Percentage Error for both models, SF and Views. A positive value corresponds to an overprediction, in contrast to a negative value. 

48 Appendix D. Kenya-Somalia example  

> Figure D.1: Projection of fatalities values over the Longitude (left), Latitude (middle), and Time (right). The black line corresponds to the observed values, the green to the Views prediction, and the red to the ShapeFinder prediction.

Figure D.1 compares the forecasted projections of fatalities from the ShapeFinder (SF) model and the Views model against the actual observed values. The black line represents the observed data, while the green and red lines correspond to the Views and ShapeFinder predictions. Our model demonstrates a clear ability to capture the peak of fatalities accurately in both longitude and time dimensions. However, it misses the peak value in latitude by one unit, indicating a minor spatial misalignment. In contrast, the Views model exhibits a consistent overprediction, especially in the first two-month horizon. 49 Appendix E. Diffusion of fatalities to neighboring cells 

Figure E.1: Histogram of the number of active cells in the spatial neighborhood (5 ×5 grid) during the future window (t+1 to t+6), conditioned on the number of active neighboring cells during the past window (t-12 to t). Each panel corresponds to a different level of past activity (N = 1 to 15), where N is the number of active cells in the 5 ×5 neighborhood from t-12 to t. The red bar in each histogram indicates the most frequent outcome. 

50 Appendix F. Additional Results: Test Periods and Forecasting Horizon 

Period h = 1 h = 2 h = 3 h = 4 h = 5 h = 6 All Horizons Jan-2022 0.2287 0.3092 0.3638 0.3547 0.3550 0.3391 0.3251 (0.0191) (0.0219) (0.0230) (0.0244) (0.0235) (0.0238) (0.0093) July-2022 0.1742 0.2397 0.1929 0.2135 0.1941 0.1920 0.2011 (0.0177) (0.0191) (0.0184) (0.0181) (0.0175) (0.0179) (0.0074) Jan-2023 0.0994 0.2289 0.1114 0.1731 0.1632 0.1444 0.1534 (0.0176) (0.0206) (0.0188) (0.0176) (0.0174) (0.0186) (0.0075) July-2023 0.1174 0.1851 0.1829 0.2164 0.2400 0.3004 0.2070 (0.0155) (0.0157) (0.0142) (0.0151) (0.0168) (0.0177) (0.0065) All Periods 0.1534 0.2391 0.2107 0.2379 0.2371 0.2441 0.2204 (0.0087) (0.0097) (0.0094) (0.0095) (0.0095) (0.0098) (0.0039) 

Note: Standard errors in parentheses. Positive values indicate the ShapeFinder (SF) model outperforms the Views model.   

> Table F.1. Absolute Error Log Ratio: log
> AE Views +1
> AE SF +1
> 

Period h = 1 h = 2 h = 3 h = 4 h = 5 h = 6 All Horizons Jan-2022 0.3117 0.4574 0.5650 0.5533 0.5464 0.5197 0.4923 (0.0374) (0.0436) (0.0458) (0.0487) (0.0471) (0.0470) (0.0184) July-2022 0.1762 0.2975 0.2155 0.2367 0.2043 0.2053 0.2226 (0.0333) (0.0361) (0.0352) (0.0341) (0.0328) (0.0334) (0.0140) Jan-2023 0.0604 0.3159 0.0625 0.1699 0.1630 0.1116 0.1472 (0.0332) (0.0403) (0.0360) (0.0337) (0.0333) (0.0357) (0.0145) July-2023 0.0931 0.1983 0.1903 0.2358 0.2816 0.3941 0.2322 (0.0289) (0.0295) (0.0259) (0.0284) (0.0319) (0.0340) (0.0122) All Periods 0.1574 0.3139 0.2540 0.2955 0.2963 0.3073 0.2708 (0.0166) (0.0187) (0.0181) (0.0184) (0.0183) (0.0189) (0.0074) 

Note: Standard errors in parentheses. Positive values indicate the ShapeFinder (SF) model outperforms the Views model.   

> Table F.2. Squared Error (SE) Log Ratio: log
> SE Views +1
> SE SF +1
> 

Tables F.1 and F.2 report the log differences in Mean Absolute Error (MAE) and Mean Squared Error (MSE) between the Views model and ShapeFinder. Positive val-ues indicate that ShapeFinder outperforms the Views model. Values in parentheses are standard errors, calculated by dividing the standard deviation of the subgroup observa-tions by the square root of the number of observations. The periods Jan-2022, Jul-2022, 51 Jan-2023, and Jul-2023 include 28, 26, 27, and 30 active conflict zones, corresponding to 1,505, 1,535, 1,577, and 1,676 Prio-Grid cells, respectively. The first notable result is the consistency of performance across both forecast hori-zons and test periods. Looking at the MAE results in Table F.1, the model consistently outperforms across all periods and horizons, with log ratios ranging from 0.0994 to 0.3638. The Jan-2022 period has the strongest performance with an overall log ratio of 0.3251 (SE: 0.0093), indicating lower forecast errors compared to the Views model. Performance peaks at horizon 3 for this period (0.3638), while horizon 1 shows more modest improvements across all periods. The July-2023 period shows an interesting pat-tern where performance improves monotonically with forecast horizon, reaching 0.3004 at h = 6 . Across all periods and horizons, the aggregate log ratio of 0.2204 (SE: 0.0039) confirms systematic improvement over the Views model. The MSE results in Table F.2 reveal a similar pattern. The Jan-2022 period again demonstrates the strongest performance with an overall log ratio of 0.4923 (SE: 0.0184), nearly double that of the Jan-2023 period (0.1472). Notably, horizon 2 consistently shows strong performance across all periods, with values ranging from 0.1983 to 0.4574. The Jan-2022 period indicates remarkably stable performance from h = 3 to h = 6 (all above 0.51). 52 Appendix G. Concepts Definitions Definition 1 (Sequence). Let {xi,j,t } be a Prio-Grid monthly fatality field where (i, j )

indexes a grid cell and t ∈ { 1, . . . , T } indexes discrete monthly time steps. A sequence of temporal length L months and spatial extent (Wlat , W lon ) grid cells is a spatiotemporal segment defined as 

Si0,j 0,t 0;Wlat ,W lon ,L = {xi,j,t : i0 ≤ i ≤ i0+Wlat −1, j 0 ≤ j ≤ j0+Wlon −1, t 0 ≤ t ≤ t0+L−1}.

Definition 2 (Past Future). Given a spatiotemporal sequence Si0,j 0,t 0;Wlat ,W lon ,L , its 

Past Future is the set of fatality values in the same spatial region over the next H

months: 

P F i0,j 0,t 0;Wlat ,W lon ,H = {xi,j,t : i0 ≤ i ≤ i0+Wlat −1, j 0 ≤ j ≤ j0+Wlon −1, t 0+L ≤ t ≤ t0+L+H−1}.H in this paper is set to six months. 

Definition 3 (Pattern). A pattern is a recurring three-dimensional shape that may have several occurrences in history. In the ShapeFinder model, an input sequence and the historical similar sequences are occurrences of the same pattern. Formally, a pattern is the set of sequences whose EMD distance (Equation 1) and R ratio (Equation 2) are below thresholds thr 1 and thr 2.

Definition 4 (Active cell). An active cell is a Prio-Grid cell that has more than zero fatalities for a given period of time. In Figure 4a, the active cells are colored in red, for the year 2022. 

Definition 5 (Active zone). An active zone is an aggregation of minimum two active cells, within a radius of 2 spatial unit. In a zone, each active cell is maximum distant to 2 unit from another active cell. Figure 4d shows examples of active zones in 2022. 

53 Appendix H. Impact of the active zone selection 

Even if the zoning selection covers almost the entire short-term autoregressive infor-mation, in this section, the coverage of the test zone is assessed through two measures: the percentage of fatalities in the test set covered by the zone defined by the training set and the percentage of active cells. Then, the impact on the prediction error is as-sessed, as the Views model covers the entire zone without distinction. In other words, the validity of a pure autoregressive model is assessed in the conflict fatalities setup.  

> Figure H.1: Time series of the monthly percentage of inclusion of fatalities (in blue) and active cells (in orange) in the active zones. The y-axis represents the percentage, and the x-axis represents the last month included in the training set used to define the active zones. E.g., the values indicated at x=June 2015, show the results of the test with a training set from July 2014 to June 2015, and the test set from August 2015 to January 2016.

In this test, we simulate the selection of active zones, as illustrated in Figure 4, using a rolling training window from July 2012–June 2013 through July 2022–June 2023. For each window, the active zone method is applied, and we measure the share of active cells and fatalities occurring within these zones during the following six months. In the first iteration, fatalities aggregated over July 2012–June 2013 are used to define the active zones. We then calculate the percentage of fatalities and active cells from July to December 2013 that fall within these zones. The window is subsequently shifted 54 forward by one month, with August 2012–July 2013 used as the next training period, and the process is repeated. This final result is a time series of monthly inclusion rates for fatalities and active cells within the active zones. The series is plotted in Figure H.1. On average, the active zones capture more than 90% of fatalities and about 75% of active cells. This suggests that the method performs well in estimating the broad spatial location of future conflict. However, still around 10% of fatalities and 25% of active cells fall outside the predicted zones. These missed cases mostly correspond to the onset of conflict, which are often low in intensity and harder to detect, explaining the difference between the two measures. The period in late 2020 shows a clear limit of the model. It represents the onset of the Tigray war in the north of Ethiopia, in a post-Covid period with very few fatalities, producing inflated percentage values. 

> Figure H.2: Average Log ratio of MSE for the Prio-Grid period observations, comparing the Views model and the ShapeFinder (SF). The black point is the average value, and the 95% confidence interval is calculated with the standard error divided by the square root of the number of observations. When the ratio is positive, the SF model outperforms the Views model. The results are presented for three categories: The cells not included in the active zones (left), all the cells (center), and the cells in the active zones (right).

55 To assess how this limitation affects model performance, Figure H.2 shows the logged difference in mean squared error between the Views model and ShapeFinder (SF). The black dot represents the average difference, and the 95% confidence interval is computed using the standard error divided by the square root of the number of observations. A positive value indicates that ShapeFinder outperforms the Views model. Results are reported for three groups of cells: those outside the active zones (left), all cells (center), and those within the active zones (right). Across all three groups, ShapeFinder consistently outperforms the Views model. The difference in error is largest for cells within active zones, where accurate predictions matter most. Outside the active zones, the difference in error narrows and approaches zero, indicating more similar performance across models. In these areas, ShapeFinder only predicts zero fatalities, indicating that the Views also model makes conservative forecasts with few fatalities. 56 Appendix I. Comparison with the original ShapeFinder 

As a robustness test of the three-dimensional spatio-temporal adaptation, we com-pare its forecasting performance with that of the original ShapeFinder model. The original model was designed for country-month data. In this comparison, each Prio-Grid cell is treated as an independent country. The input consists of the previous 12 months of fatalities for each cell, and the full set of Prio-Grid cell fatality time series serves as the historical reference. Because the historical dataset is very large, the test is limited to an input period from January 2022 to December 2022, with forecasts evaluated for the subsequent six months, from January 2023 to June 2023, using historical data available up to December 2022. The original ShapeFinder model requires about one hour to run for roughly 120 countries. In this grid-cell application, even after filtering out the least active cells, the model took more than one day to complete. Performance results are shown in Figure I.1. Overall, the three-dimensional model consistently outperforms the original ShapeFinder in accuracy. Given its lower performance and substantially higher runtime, the original model is not suitable for large-scale grid-level forecasting. However, it may still be useful for isolated cells where the three-dimensional model cannot be applied. 57 Figure I.1: Log ratio in Mean Squared Error of the original ShapeFinder model and the three-dimensional adaptation. A positive value corresponds to a lower error from the adaptation, in contrast to a negative value that corresponds to a better performance from the original model. The grey points represent the ratio for one Prio-Grid cell, while the black point and line represent the average value with the 95% confidence interval, calculated using the standard error divided by the square root of the number of observations. 

58 Appendix J. Grid example calculation 

In this section, the calculations of the Spatial Distance, Earth Mover’s Distance (EMD), and Euclidean distance of the example presented in Figure 3 are detailed. As a reminder, the patterns are represented in Figure J.1 with the cell values. 

Figure J.1: Representation of the example shown in Figure 3. Three patterns on a 5 ×5 grid over three months. The x-axis represents longitude, and the y-axis represents latitude. The cell color indicates the number of fatalities per month, ranging from 0 (white) to 9 (dark red), with darker shades representing higher values. The number in the center of the cell indicates the value of the cell. 

59 Spatial Distance 

In classical spatial regressions, the model includes a spatial lag, with higher weights assigned to the closest neighbors. In our example, where the central cell is the point of interest, the weights would be: 

weights =



0.01 0.05 0.1 0.05 0.01 0.05 0.3 0.5 0.3 0.05 0.1 0.5 1.0 0.5 0.10.05 0.3 0.5 0.3 0.05 0.01 0.05 0.1 0.05 0.01 



In the matrix, the highest weight is placed at the center (cell [2,2] in the matrix), and the weights decrease as the distance from the central cell increases. These weights are proportional to the distance from the center of the grid. Then, if we define the spatial distance SP P1,P 2 between pattern 1 and pattern 2 with: 

SP P1,P 2 = X

> month

| X

> lat,long

P1,lat,long,m ∗ weights lat,long − X

> lat,long

P2,lat,long,m ∗ weights lat,long |

Then : 

α = P1,lat,long,m ∗ weights lat,long 

=



0.00 0.05 0.20 0.05 0.00 0.10 2.70 3.00 1.50 0.10 0.10 2.50 5.00 1.50 0.10 0.10 0.90 2.00 0.90 0.10 0.00 0.05 0.20 0.05 0.00 



,



0.00 0.10 0.30 0.10 0.01 0.05 1.50 2.50 1.20 0.15 0.20 2.50 8.00 1.50 0.20 0.05 1.20 2.00 0.90 0.15 0.01 0.10 0.10 0.10 0.01 



,



0.00 0.10 0.40 0.15 0.00 0.10 0.60 3.00 1.50 0.20 0.20 2.50 6.00 4.50 0.30 0.10 0.60 3.00 1.50 0.20 0.02 0.10 0.40 0.15 0.00 



60 β = P2,lat,long,m ∗ weights lat,long 

=



0.01 0.00 0.10 0.00 0.01 0.05 2.70 3.00 1.20 0.00 0.00 3.00 3.00 1.50 0.30 0.10 0.60 1.50 0.60 0.00 0.00 0.05 0.20 0.05 0.02 



,



0.01 0.05 0.30 0.10 0.00 0.15 1.80 3.00 1.50 0.10 0.30 3.00 9.00 1.00 0.20 0.15 1.50 1.00 0.30 0.10 0.00 0.15 0.40 0.15 0.00 



,



0.01 0.10 0.30 0.10 0.01 0.05 0.60 4.00 2.10 0.10 0.10 2.00 8.00 4.50 0.50 0.05 0.60 4.00 2.10 0.10 0.00 0.05 0.20 0.05 0.03 



So: 

SP P1,P 2 = X

> month

| X αmonth − X βmonth |

= 3 .21 + 1 .33 + 4 .03 = 8 .57 

Similarly for SP P1,P 3 ,

δ = P3,lat,long,m ∗ weights lat,long 

=



0.01 0.05 0.10 0.05 0.01 0.05 1.20 2.50 1.20 0.05 0.10 2.50 8.00 2.50 0.10 0.05 1.20 2.50 1.20 0.05 0.01 0.05 0.10 0.05 0.01 



,



0.01 0.05 0.10 0.05 0.01 0.05 1.20 2.50 1.20 0.05 0.10 2.50 8.00 2.50 0.10 0.05 1.20 2.50 1.20 0.05 0.01 0.05 0.10 0.05 0.01 



,



0.01 0.05 0.10 0.05 0.01 0.05 1.20 2.50 1.20 0.05 0.10 2.50 8.00 2.50 0.10 0.05 1.20 2.50 1.20 0.05 0.01 0.05 0.10 0.05 0.01 



61 So: 

SP P1,P 3 = X

> month

| X αmonth − X δmonth |

= 2 .44 + 0 .71 + 1 .98 = 5 .13 

62 Earth Mover’s Distance 

The Earth Mover’s Distance (EMD) is computed as follows: EMD = X

> i,j

γ∗ 

> i,j

∗ ci,j 

where γ∗ 

> i,j

is the Optimal Transport Matrix or the matrix that lowers the transport cost. ci,j is the cost matrix of the Euclidean distance between the points i and j.The Optimal Transport Matrix is computed from the “Source” distribution called 

w1 (i.e., the normalized fatalities of pattern 1) and the “Target” distribution w2 (i.e., the normalized fatalities of pattern 2). The normalized patterns are computed as: 

P norm  

> 1

= P1

P P1

, P norm  

> 2

= P2

P P2

This gives us the following points : 

Pattern 1 Pattern 2 

Longitude Latitude Month F atatilies norm Longitude Latitude Month F atatilies norm 

0.0000 0.0000 1.0000 0.0047 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0048 0.0000 0.0000 2.0000 0.0094 0.0000 0.0000 2.0000 0.0048 0.0000 0.0000 3.0000 0.0047 0.0000 0.0000 4.0000 0.0048 0.0000 1.0000 0.0000 0.0094 0.0000 1.0000 0.0000 0.0048 0.0000 1.0000 1.0000 0.0425 0.0000 1.0000 1.0000 0.0429 0.0000 1.0000 2.0000 0.0283 0.0000 1.0000 2.0000 0.0286 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...2.0 4.0 2.0 0.0189 2.0 4.0 3.0 0.0048 2.0 4.0 3.0 0.0142 2.0 4.0 4.0 0.0143 63 After computation of the optimal transport matrix, we obtain : 

γ∗ 

> i,j

=



0.0046 0.0 0.0 ... 0.0 0.0 0.00.0 0.0048 0.0 ... 0.0 0.0 0.00.0 0.0 0.0046 ... 0.0 0.0 0.0

... ... ... . . . ... ... ...

0.0 0.0 0.0 ... 0.0 0.0 0.00.0 0.0 0.0 ... 0.0095 0.0 0.00.0 0.0 0.0 ... 0.0 0.0048 0.009 



Then, the Euclidean distance between the coordinates of both patterns is calculated using: 

di,j =

q

(long i − long j )2 + ( lat i − lat j )2 + ( month i − month j )2

This results in a cost matrix ci,j of shape (n1, n 2), where n1 is the number of non-zero cell in pattern1, and n2 the number of non-zero cell in pattern2. 

ci,j =



1.0 1.0 3.0 ... 4.5826 4.899 5.3852 2.0 0.0 2.0 ... 4.4721 4.5826 4.899 3.0 1.0 1.0 ... 4.5826 4.4721 4.5826 

... ... ... . . . ... ... ...

4.5826 4.5826 5.3852 ... 1.0 2.0 3.04.899 4.4721 4.899 ... 0.0 1.0 2.05.3852 4.5826 4.5826 ... 1.0 0.0 1.0



64 So: 

EM D P1,P 2 = X

> i,j

γ∗ 

> i,j

∗ ci,j 

= (0 .0046 × 1.0) + (0 .0046 × 1.0) + ... + (0 .009 × 1.0) = 0 .2290 

Similarly, we repeat the operation with P1 and P3.

γ∗ 

> i,k

=



0.0 0.0047 0.0 ... 0.0 0.0 0.00.0 0.0008 0.0056 ... 0.0 0.0 0.00.0 0.0 0.0 ... 0.0 0.0 0.0

... ... ... . . . ... ... ...

0.0 0.0 0.0 ... 0.0 0.0 0.00.0 0.0 0.0 ... 0.0056 0.0 0.00.0 0.0 0.0 ... 0.0 0.0056 0.0



ci,k =



1.0 0.0 1.0 ... 4.5826 4.899 5.3852 2.0 1.0 0.0 ... 4.4721 4.5826 4.899 3.0 2.0 1.0 ... 4.5826 4.4721 4.5826 

... ... ... . . . ... ... ...

4.5826 4.4721 4.5826 ... 1.0 2.0 3.04.899 4.5826 4.4721 ... 0.0 1.0 2.05.3852 4.899 4.5826 ... 1.0 0.0 1.0



65 EM D P1,P 3 = X

i,k 

γ∗

i,k ∗ ci,k 

= 0 .2984 

Finally, 

(EM D P1,P 2 < EM D P1,P 3 ,SP P1,P 2 > SP P1,P 3

66 Euclidean Distance 

The Euclidean Distance between P1 and P2, here called ed is calculated as: 

A = P1 − P2

=



−1 1 1 1 −11 0 0 1 21 −1 2 0 −20 1 1 1 20 0 0 0 −2



,



−1 1 0 0 1

−2 −1 −1 −1 1

−1 −1 −1 1 0

−2 −1 2 2 11 −1 −3 −1 1



,



−1 0 1 1 −11 0 −2 −2 21 1 −2 0 −21 0 −2 −2 22 1 2 2 −3



Taking the absolute values: 

|A| =



1 1 1 1 11 0 0 1 21 1 2 0 20 1 1 1 20 0 0 0 2



,



1 1 0 0 12 1 1 1 11 1 1 1 02 1 2 2 11 1 3 1 1



,



1 0 1 1 11 0 2 2 21 1 2 0 21 0 2 2 22 1 2 2 3



ed P 1,P 2 = X |A| = 84 

67 Similarly, for P1 and P3:

B = P1 − P3

=



−1 0 1 0 −11 5 1 1 10 0 −3 −2 01 −1 −1 −1 1

−1 0 1 0 −1



,



−1 1 2 1 00 1 0 0 21 0 0 −2 10 0 −1 −1 20 1 0 1 0



,



−1 1 3 2 −11 −2 1 1 31 0 −2 4 21 −2 1 1 31 1 3 2 −1



Taking the absolute values: 

|B| =



1 0 1 0 11 5 1 1 10 0 3 2 01 1 1 1 11 0 1 0 1



,



1 1 2 1 00 1 0 0 21 0 0 2 10 0 1 1 20 1 0 1 0



,



1 1 3 2 11 2 1 1 31 0 2 4 21 2 1 1 31 1 3 2 1



ed P 1,P 3 = X |B| = 84 

So: 

ed P 1,P 2 = ed P 1,P 3

68